---
title: September 11, 2004
disqus_identifier: 2004-09-september-11-2004
comments: true
---

Three years ago today, the United States of America experienced the single worst act of terrorism against itself. I remember that day as if it were yesterday.

I woke up that morning, and just like any other at that period in my life, I got it in the car and drove to the gym. While in the car, I was listening to the radio announcer talking about a plane hitting the WTC.

A few years before that, I remember watching television one evening, without really paying attention to what was on. All of the sudden, something really caught my attention. It was Tom Brokaw's voice telling me that aliens had landed in New York. Ultimately, this ended up being a 30 minute promotional spot for the movie Independence Day.

Because of this experience a few years ago, the first thoughts that went through my mind were quickly trying to process which new movie this could be promoting. Of course, there was no way that this could have really happened.

The gym was just a mile away, and after I got there, I realized that this was in fact really happening. The girls behind the counter were crying hysterically. I asked what was wrong and they had mentioned that they were watching what was happening on the television. It now registered to me that this was for real.

We were a nation under attack. I stayed there at the gym, watching with everyone else while the second tower fell. I was there when the media announced that another plane had struck the Pentagon. I was there when we heard that a plane went down in a Pennsylvania field.

I went home, and sat in front of the television, yearning for any new information that could shed any light on who and what might have caused this.

I remember the flags put up in everyone's front yard. People seemed to be a little more friendly. Against what these savages tried to accomplish, the only thing they succeeded in was uniting us as a nation.

I remember President Bush's words when he addressed the nation. "For the last nine days, the entire world has seen the state of our union, and it is strong", he declared to thundering applause.

Fast forward three years. Most of the confusion and outrage is still there. Three years of processing this event has not made it any easier. I still get misty eyed every time I see the footage of the days events. 

Someone asked the question the other day, "When do you think we wont associate the words 'nine-eleven' to that awful day?" I think that it's very important to never forget that horrendous day.

Let's never forget the people who died that day. Let's never forget the soldiers who have died since then protecting the freedoms that we so cherish. Let's not forget the soldiers that are *still* out there fighting for us and protecting us from these savages. I promise you that they havent forgotten what they're fighting for.

God bless America...
